over the years a fractional reserve
system and it's integrated network of
banks backed by a central bank has
become the dominant money system of the
world at the same time in the fraction
of gold backing the debt money has
steadily shrunk to nothing the basic
nature of money has changed in the past
a paper dollar was actually a receipt
that could be redeemed for a fixed rate
of gold or silver in the present a paper
or digital dollar can only be redeemed
for another paper or digital dollar in
the past
privately created bank credit existed
only in the form of private banknotes
which people had the choice to refuse
just as we have the choice to refuse
someone's private cheque today in the
present privately created bank credit is
legally convertible to government-issued
fiat currency the dollars loonies and
pounds we habitually think of his money
fiat currency is money created by
government Fiat or decree and legal
tender laws declare that citizens must
accept this viet money as payment for
debt or else the courts will not enforce
the obligation so now the question is if
governments and banks can both just
create money then how much money exists
in the past the total amount of money in
existence was limited to the actual
physical quantities of whatever
commodity was in use as money for
example in order for new gold or silver
money to be created more gold or silver
had to be found and dug out of the
ground
in the present money is literally
created as debt new money is created
whenever anyone takes a loan from the
bank as a result the total amount of
money that can be created has only one
real limit the total level of debt
government's place an additional
statutory limit on the creation of new
money